---
layout: post
title: "Mike Babcock, Bill Tierney and Big-Time Coaching Challenges"
quote: A Hockey Blog for Hockey People
image: false
video: false
---
Six years ago, Bill Tierney turned NCAA lacrosse on its' collective head. Tierney left the established, perennially-contending Princeton Tiger program to take the helm at college lacrosse's westernmost outpost, the University of Denver. It was a risky move for a veteran coach, and one that left many in the lacrosse community shaking their heads. 

Two weeks ago, Mike Babcock left an established, perennially-contending team in Detroit for hockey's most passionate outpost, Toronto. It was, and is, a risky move for a veteran coach. This isn't to say that Toronto for Babcock is as risky as Denver was for Tierney. The Toronto Maple Leafs are one of hockey's most storied franchises. The team has money to spend, and the inclination to do so. What Toronto lacks, however, is telling. 

To many in the hockey world, Phil Kessel is an enigma. He is at once perhaps the best pure shooter in hockey, with a wrist shot that gives opposing goaltenders nightmares, and, according to one former Leafs coach, “an uncoachable player.” The evidence seems to point fairly conclusively to Phil being a major reason for Randy Carlyle's unceremonious exit from the Air Canada Centre. There have been growing whispers that Kessel is uncoachable, and that he has been from his days at the University of Minnesota. The Leafs have been bent on building a team around him, having traded three picks to Boston for Kessel, in one of former Leafs GM Brian Burke's more aggressive moves. Two of those three picks turned into Tyler Seguin and Dougie Hamilton, which spelled disaster when the Leafs began to chronically underperform. Kessel is perhaps the Leafs' biggest asset and biggest question mark, though it is beginning to look like the Leafs may have moved from the Kessel-as-cornerstone model to one that features James van Riemsdyk as the Leafs' main building block. Kessel's success in Toronto will likely mirror Babcock's success in the latter's first years as coach. 

Kessel is far from the only issue within the Leafs' dressing room. Dion Phaneuf, the Leafs' captain and a stalwart in its first defensive pairing, received a seven-year, $49 million contract extension during the 2013-2014 season. The contract comes with a cap hit of $7 million a season. Although Phaneuf seems well-liked and well-respected in the room, his on-ice performance has been less than stellar. The simple fact in today's NHL is that performance dictates value. Quite simply, Phaneuf is not worth nearly what his cap hit costs the Leafs. It will be interesting how long Babcock and Phaneuf will be together in Toronto. It will certainly be difficult for the Leafs to find an interested trade partner, considering Phaneuf's massive cap hit, but if he can find his game again, perhaps a team or two would be willing to take a flier on the once-feared defenseman. 

Perhaps the most interesting personnel issue facing Babcock as bench boss of the Leafs is Nazem Kadri. The London, Ontario native found himself in Shanhan's doghouse earlier this year, after Kadri's “discipline issues” caused Shanahan to suspend the forward for three games. Kadri was left somewhat embarrassed by the suspension, after the forward had apologized after being benched for what he claimed was oversleeping and missing a team meeting. There is no doubt that Kadri is an integral part to what will likely be a difficult rebuild in Toronto. Kadri was picked seventh overall by the Leafs in the 2009 Entry Draft, and certainly has the potential to be a first-line center for years to come. The facing Babcock and the Leafs is this: Is Kadri, “discipline issues” and all, worth the $6 mil per year cap hit that it will likely take to buy his UFA years? During his tenure in TO, Randy Carlyle made it clear that he believed that Kadri had what it takes to be an elite NHL forward. Ditto for Brian Burke and his successor, former GM Dave Nonis. Kadri's future with the Leafs will likely be determined by Babcock and Shanahan. If the duo decides that Kadri isn't worth the cap hit, he may be a one-and-done with Babcock's Leafs, and find himself firmly on the trading block come next summer.  

As the Babcock—Leafs marriage became more apparent, questions arose about just why Babcock would choose to take on a challenge quite this enormous. There is no denying that Toronto is the single toughest market in hockey. Fans demand a winner, and as last season's sweater tossing debacle showed, they aren't always graceful in defeat. The media is notoriously tough on players, coaches and the general manager, and tensions have grown between the Leafs and the media over recent seasons. Phil Kessel and Dion Phaneuf have notoriously terse relationships with the media, and after last year's TradeCentre tweet debacle, you could certainly add Joffrey Lupul to the list of Leafs with iffy relationships with the media. The lights certainly shine brightest in Canada's largest city, and losing coaches and general managers are often given short leashes, Carlyle not withstanding. Babcock received an eight-year, $50 million contract from the Leafs. It was rumored that Babcock had received an offer from the recently deep-pocketed Buffalo Sabres for somewhere in the six-mil per year range. Babcock ultimately chose to take on a bigger challenge, and slightly bigger contract, in Toronto. 

Perhaps Babcock can take solace in this: Six years after he left the comfy confines of Princeton for the wide-open skies of Denver, Bill Tierney and his Denver Pioneers won the NCAA Division I Men's Lacrosse championship last week, becoming the first team west of Chapel Hill, North Carolina to do so. Let's hope for Babcock's sake he can do something similar with the Leafs, and deliver the Stanley Cup to Toronto for the first time since 1969.  